README.md, before:

# cubit
A Maya plugin for simulation of soft-body deformation and fracture, in real-time.* _cubit_ works by creating a voxelized version of an input mesh and using the voxels as deformation lattices for the vertices within. The simulation itself is based on Position Based Dynamics (PBD), using special voxelized gram-schmidt (VGS) constraints both within and between voxels to achieve both deformation and fracture. The technique originates from [this paper](https://web.ics.purdue.edu/~tmcgraw/papers/voxel_2025.pdf) by Tim McGraw and Xinyi Zhou.

The magic of _this_ plugin is that it gives users the ability to customize the simulation weights and constraints via custom painting and selection tools.

___

*Real-time in Maya? What's the point? That's a fair question - I see this plugin as a step in a (currently incomplete) pipeline. Prepare the mesh in Maya, using this plugin to paint simulation weights and constraints onto the mesh, and quickly visualize the results. Then export the mesh and the weights + constraints to a game engine (where real-time actually matters), and run the simulation in-game with a corresponding engine plugin. Of course, I think it's totally valid to use this in animation as well, you just may get better mileage out of other non-real-time techniques.


# Contents
- [Installing the plugin](#installing-the-plugin)
  - [Installation requirements](#installation-requirements)
  - [Installation steps](#installation-steps)
- [Basic usage](#basic-usage)
  - [Input mesh requirements](#input-mesh-requirements)
  - [Voxelize the mesh](#voxelize-the-mesh)
  - [Voxelizer options](#voxelizer-options)
  - [Mesh-specific simulation settings](#mesh-specific-simulation-settings)
  - [Assign a material to the mesh interior](#assign-a-material-to-the-mesh-interior)
- [Painting simulation weights](#painting-simulation-weights)
  - [Selecting and hiding](#selecting-and-hiding)
  - [Particle mass](#particle-mass)
  - [Face-to-face strain limits](#face-to-face-strain-limits)
  - [Paint tool settings](#paint-tool-settings)
- [Real-time simulation interaction](#real-time-simulation-interaction)
  - [Drag tool settings](#drag-tool-settings)
- [Adding primitive colliders](#adding-primitive-colliders)
- [Global simulation settings](#global-simulation-settings)
- [Roadmap](#issue-roadmap)
- [Developing the plug-in](#developing-the-plug-in)
  - [Development requirements](#development-requirements)
- [License](#license)

# Installing the plugin

### Installation requirements

- Windows OS (for DirectX11 + Maya Viewport 2.0)
- Maya 2025+ (may work in lower versions but only tested in Maya 2025)

### Installation steps

- Download the `cubit.mll` file (in the root directory) and put it in your plugin directory. Then load it up from Maya's plugin manager (Windows > Settings and Preferences > Plug-in Manager). If you don't know your plugin directory path, look at the plug-in manager for examples.
- Ensure the `dx11Shader.mll` plugin is loaded in the plugin manager.
- Enable Viewport 2.0 with DirectX11: `Windows > Settings/Preferences > Preferences > Display > Viewport 2.0 > DirectX 11` (this may require a Maya restart).

In the future, I hope to make this available for download directly through the Maya plugin app store.

# Basic usage

### Input mesh requirements
- The input mesh must be a single, manifold, non-self-intersecting, water-tight mesh.
- If voxelization fails on one of these counts, try using Maya's mesh clean up tools, merging vertices, or using boolean operations to join mesh pieces.

<a id="voxelize-the-mesh"></a>
### <img src="icons/Voxelize.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" />Voxelize the mesh

![Voxelization setup example](images/VoxelizeExample.png)

After loading the plugin, select your input mesh. Then, from the _cubit_ menu shelf, click the left-most button to open the voxelizer menu. Choose your voxelization options (see details below), the click voxelize to prepare the mesh. That's it! The mesh will now simulate on playback - though you may want to customize its behavior with some of the other tools that ship with this plugin.

### Voxelizer Options

![cubit menu for voxelization / mesh preparation](images/VoxelizerMenu.png)

#### Voxel Grid
1. The voxel size changes the edge length of a voxel. Voxels are always cubes.
1. The sliders can be used to change the subdivision resolution of the voxelization grid.
1. The checkbox "Lock grid size" will attempt to maintain the world size of the grid. So changing either voxel size or the subdivision sliders while this is checked will force the other to change. Because voxels must be cubes, this is a best-effort process.

#### Advanced Options

1. **Surface**: check this box to voxelize and simulate a surface shell of the input mesh.
1. **Solid**: check this box to voxelize and simulate the interior of the mesh. (Checking both surface and solid yields a full, conservative voxelization. This is the default behavior).
1. **Render as voxels**: when unchecked, the original mesh is drawn, but it is simulated according to its voxelization. When checked, the voxels are drawn instead of the original mesh.
1. **Clip triangles**: whether or not to clip the mesh's triangles to voxel bounds during voxelization. Unclipped triangles give a nice effect when tearing a mesh. Clipped tend to look better during regular deformation.

### Mesh-specific simulation settings

Open this menu by opening the Attribute Editor (`Windows > General Editor > Attribute Editor`), and finding the mesh's PBD node.

![PBD simulation settings (per-mesh)](images/pbdsimsettings.png)

1. **Compliance**: this controls the overall squishiness of the mesh. A value of zero is the stiffest it gets!
1. **Voxel relaxation**: this value also has an effect on the squishiness of the mesh, to a lesser extent. As relaxation decreases, the mesh will deform more due to shear.
1. **Voxel edge uniformity**: a companion to voxel relaxation, this controls how strictly voxels have to stay cubes during deformation. As edge uniformity decreases, the mesh deforms more due to voxel anisotropy.
1. **VGS iterations** the number of substeps run in the VGS algorithm core loop. For high resolution voxelizations, more substeps may be required to get convergence. (Careful! This has a high performance impact).
1. **Gravity strength**: the gravitational acceleration constant in m/s^2

These settings are all keyable.

### Assign a material to the mesh interior

The input mesh was just a surface, but the voxelized mesh is a volume! The voxelization process transfers attributes (UVs, normals) and shading sets to the interior, extrapolating based on the closest surface point, but it may not look exactly how you want. By right-clicking a voxelized mesh, you can assign an interior shader:

![assign an interior material](images/assigninteriormaterial.png)

Recommendation: use a material that samples 3D textures to take advantage of the volumetric nature of the voxelized mesh!

This feature is still in development and has limitations. In the future, it will support using shaders with custom vertex attributes regarding the voxel grid (grid position, distance transform information, etc.). See the [roadmap](#issue-roadmap) for more information.

# Painting simulation weights

![moo](images/moo.png)

Beyond the per-mesh simulation settings mentioned [above](#mesh-specific-simulation-settings), there are also dials that can be tuned on a more granular level.

_cubit_ ships with custom tools that allow you to paint on the mass of the mesh and also the strain limits between voxel faces: that is, how much a voxel can stretch or compress before breaking from its neighbors.

<a id="selecting-and-hiding"></a>
## <img src="images/selectandhideicon.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" />Selecting and hiding

Much of the time, the pieces of the mesh you want to paint are on the _inside_. After all, these simulated meshes are solid, and meant to be destroyed. To be able to paint weights on the mesh interior, you need to be able to _access_ it. That's where the select tool comes in handy:

![Selecting and hiding pieces of spot the cow](images/voxelselect.png)

With the voxel selection tool, you can use the typical marquee or drag selection workflows (camera-based or not) to highlight and hide individual voxels - and the pieces of the mesh within.

<a id="particle-mass"></a>
## <img src="icons/VoxelPaint.png" alt="voxel" width="40" align="absmiddle" />Particle mass

In each voxel, there are 8 particles: these are the simulation primitives in PBD. To set the mass of the mesh, you set the mass of particles. The particle paint tool allows you to do just this. 

In the below image, Spot the cow has the particles in his head painted to be a quarter of the mass of the particles in his body. The paint colors have been chosen so that higher transparency means less mass:

![Spot the cow with mass painting](images/particlepainting.png)

If we simulated spot like this, he would be bottom heavy. If we tossed him around, he would rotate about his lower body (his center of mass, rather than his geometric center). And if we collided him with another mesh of lower mass, he wouldn't lose much velocity!

The paint tool also exposes a special _infinite mass_ value: particles with infinite mass are pinned, even under gravity. This can be useful for anchoring a mesh in place while you have other actors deform or destroy it.

For more info about tool settings, see the [paint tool settings section](#paint-tool-settings) below.

<a id="face-to-face-strain-limits"></a>
## <img src="icons/VoxelPaint.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" />Face-to-face strain limits

A similar painting tool exists for setting the face-to-face strain limits between voxels. This tool allows you to set how much the voxels can compress or stretch apart before breaking apart from their neighbors.

Like with particle mass, there's also a special _infinite strain_ value that makes face-to-face connections completely unbreakable.

### Paint tool settings

Open this menu by navigating to `Windows > General Editors > Tool Settings` after activating the paint tool from the _cubit_ shelf (or from the mesh's right-click marking menu).

#### Global settings

![Paint tool settings](images/painttoolsettings.png)

- **Radius**: the size of the brush, in pixels.
- **Strength**: the paint value, a p.ercentage of the values set on the PBD node (see mesh-specific settings below).
- **Infinite**: whether to use the special infinite paint value (ignores strength).
- **Mode**: the paint mode; `Set` directly applies the given paint strength to the mesh where painted. `Add` adds the existing paint strength with the brush strength, `Subtract` subtracts it.
- **Camera-based painting**: whether or not to paint only elements visible to the camera. When disables, anything and everything under the brush gets paint applied.
- **Low color**: the color to use as the low end of a gradient, when the paint value is 0.
- **High color**: the color to use as the high end of a gradient, when the paint value is 100.
- **Face mask**: limits face constraint painting to given local-space directions
- **Particle mask**: limits particle painting to a subset of the 8 particles per voxel.

#### Mesh-specific settings

Open this menu by opening the Attribute Editor (`Windows > General Editor > Attribute Editor`), and finding the mesh's PBD node.

![PBD paint settings](images/pbdpaintsettings.png)

On each mesh's PBD node, in Maya's Attribute Editor, there are settings that give meaning to "Paint strength." This is best explained by example: in the above image, `Particle mass (low): 0.01` means that a paint strength of 0 corresponds to a particle mass of 0.01. A paint strength of 100 corresponds to a mass of 5, and anything in between is a linear interpolation of the two.

This way, the global paint settings can stay constant while meaning different things for different meshes, and the paint colors stay meaningful.

<a id="real-time-simulation-interaction"></a>
# <img src="icons/VoxelDrag.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" /> Real-time simulation interaction

With _cubit_, you can interact with the simulated mesh _in the viewport_, during playback. Click-and-drag the mesh with the voxel drag tool to pull, tear, and launch mesh voxels.

![spot right after dragging](images/spotdragged.png)

### Drag tool settings

Open this menu by navigating to `Windows > General Editors > Tool Settings` after activating the drag tool from the _cubit_ shelf (or from the mesh's right-click marking menu).

![Drag tool settings](images/dragtoolsettings.png)

1. **Radius**: the size, in pixels, of the drag tool's influence from the mouse.
1. **Strength**: how far voxels get dragged relative to the mouse's movement. A factor of 1 means voxels get dragged exactly as much as the mouse moves.
1. **Camera-based**: whether or not the mouse can drag voxels that are not visible.

<a id="adding-primitive-colliders"></a>
# <img src="icons/VoxelCollider.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" /> Adding primitive colliders

![Capsule collider](images/capsulecollider.png)

Other objects in the scene can participate in the simulation via primitive colliders. _cubit_ supports five types of primitive collider shapes: plane, sphere, capsule, box, and cylinder. As their name implies, colliders can act as kinematic collision volumes against simulated meshes. You can even animate colliders via keyframes!

Attach a collider to an object by selecting the object in the viewport, then right-clicking the collider icon in the _cubit_ shelf menu and selecting your desired collider shape.

### Collider settings

![collider editor](images/collidereditor.png)

Each collider has slightly different settings depending on its shape - various adjustable geometric properties. The collider settings can be found in its shape node in the Attribute Editor.

In addition to geometric attributes, each collider has a `Friction` attribute that controls how simulated PBD particles interact with the collider surface.

Fun fact - when you voxelize your first mesh, if you don't already have a collider in the scene, a plane collider will be created for you to act as the ground!

These settings are all keyable.

# Global Simulation Settings

In addition to the per-mesh simulation settings [discussed previously](#mesh-specific-simulation-settings), there are some simulation settings that affect all simulated objects.

![global simulation settings](images/globalsimulationsettings.PNG)
1. **Enable particle collisions**: when enabled, PBD particles can collide with each other. This allows voxels to stack on each other, prevents interpenetration of different parts of a mesh, and allows for multiple meshes to collide with each other.
1. **Enable primitive collisions**: when enabled, PBD particles will collide with primitive colliders. 
1. **Substeps per frame**: this setting controls the number of PBD loop iterations performed per frame. Setting this too low can cause under-convergence (often manifests as extra compliance), and setting it too high can have a large impact on performance.
1. **Particle friction**: this is the friction coefficient for particle-particle collisions.

The reason these settings are global is because particle data must be managed in one place in order to facilitate collisions between particles of different meshes.

These settings are all keyable.

<a id="issue-roadmap"></a>
# 🚧 Roadmap

There are still several features under development (though currently on pause), and many bugs as well. You can view them all in repo's [issues](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues). There are a few high-priority enhancements to call out here, though:

1. [Support for saving scenes with the _cubit_ plugin!](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/45) Pretty important obviously, it just didn't make the beta cut. Similarly - [the ability to reset the simulation](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/36) to the beginning or cached frames.
1. [Support for recording and playing back interactions with the drag tool.](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/77) Right now, interaction is just for fun and testing; it cannot be rendered out. With record and replay, it could be included in the render.
1. [Support for using voxelization vertex attributes in custom interior shaders.](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/41) Basically, right now you can assign a shader to the interior of the voxelized mesh, but your shader does not have access to some key information about the voxelized mesh that could greatly help create interesting volumetric effects. 

# Developing the plug-in

### Development requirements
- vcpkg: (clone from https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg.git , go to the directory, and run the bootstrap: .\bootstrap-vcpkg.bat)
- Environment variables: 
  - `MAYA_PLUGIN_DIR` set to a directory where Maya finds plugins. There are several (run `getenv MAYA_PLUG_IN_PATH` in MEL command line or open the plug-in manager). Ideally, choose one that doesn't require admin privelege. 
  - `VCPKG_ROOT` set to the installation directory of `vcpkg`.
 - Dependencies listed in `vcpkg.json` and will be downloaded automatically on initial build.

Debug configuration: builds dependencies as DLLs and puts them alongside the plugin `.mll` in the specified maya plugin directory. Building as DLLs reduces the build time.

Release configuration: builds dependencies as static libs. Slower to build, but easier to distribute / consume. Release builds, of course, will run much faster as well.


# License

This project uses the CGAL (Computational Geometry Algorithms Library).

CGAL is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL).
See https://www.cgal.org/license.html for details.

If you distribute this software, you must comply with the terms of the GPL.

Commit message:

Adds clarification on paint value units to readme

README.md, after:

# cubit
A Maya plugin for simulation of soft-body deformation and fracture, in real-time.* _cubit_ works by creating a voxelized version of an input mesh and using the voxels as deformation lattices for the vertices within. The simulation itself is based on Position Based Dynamics (PBD), using special voxelized gram-schmidt (VGS) constraints both within and between voxels to achieve both deformation and fracture. The technique originates from [this paper](https://web.ics.purdue.edu/~tmcgraw/papers/voxel_2025.pdf) by Tim McGraw and Xinyi Zhou.

The magic of _this_ plugin is that it gives users the ability to customize the simulation weights and constraints via custom painting and selection tools.

___

*Real-time in Maya? What's the point? That's a fair question - I see this plugin as a step in a (currently incomplete) pipeline. Prepare the mesh in Maya, using this plugin to paint simulation weights and constraints onto the mesh, and quickly visualize the results. Then export the mesh and the weights + constraints to a game engine (where real-time actually matters), and run the simulation in-game with a corresponding engine plugin. Of course, I think it's totally valid to use this in animation as well, you just may get better mileage out of other non-real-time techniques.


# Contents
- [Installing the plugin](#installing-the-plugin)
  - [Installation requirements](#installation-requirements)
  - [Installation steps](#installation-steps)
- [Basic usage](#basic-usage)
  - [Input mesh requirements](#input-mesh-requirements)
  - [Voxelize the mesh](#voxelize-the-mesh)
  - [Voxelizer options](#voxelizer-options)
  - [Mesh-specific simulation settings](#mesh-specific-simulation-settings)
  - [Assign a material to the mesh interior](#assign-a-material-to-the-mesh-interior)
- [Painting simulation weights](#painting-simulation-weights)
  - [Selecting and hiding](#selecting-and-hiding)
  - [Particle mass](#particle-mass)
  - [Face-to-face strain limits](#face-to-face-strain-limits)
  - [Paint tool settings](#paint-tool-settings)
- [Real-time simulation interaction](#real-time-simulation-interaction)
  - [Drag tool settings](#drag-tool-settings)
- [Adding primitive colliders](#adding-primitive-colliders)
- [Global simulation settings](#global-simulation-settings)
- [Roadmap](#issue-roadmap)
- [Developing the plug-in](#developing-the-plug-in)
  - [Development requirements](#development-requirements)
- [License](#license)

# Installing the plugin

### Installation requirements

- Windows OS (for DirectX11 + Maya Viewport 2.0)
- Maya 2025+ (may work in lower versions but only tested in Maya 2025)

### Installation steps

- Download the `cubit.mll` file (in the root directory) and put it in your plugin directory. Then load it up from Maya's plugin manager (Windows > Settings and Preferences > Plug-in Manager). If you don't know your plugin directory path, look at the plug-in manager for examples.
- Ensure the `dx11Shader.mll` plugin is loaded in the plugin manager.
- Enable Viewport 2.0 with DirectX11: `Windows > Settings/Preferences > Preferences > Display > Viewport 2.0 > DirectX 11` (this may require a Maya restart).

In the future, I hope to make this available for download directly through the Maya plugin app store.

# Basic usage

### Input mesh requirements
- The input mesh must be a single, manifold, non-self-intersecting, water-tight mesh.
- If voxelization fails on one of these counts, try using Maya's mesh clean up tools, merging vertices, or using boolean operations to join mesh pieces.

<a id="voxelize-the-mesh"></a>
### <img src="icons/Voxelize.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" />Voxelize the mesh

![Voxelization setup example](images/VoxelizeExample.png)

After loading the plugin, select your input mesh. Then, from the _cubit_ menu shelf, click the left-most button to open the voxelizer menu. Choose your voxelization options (see details below), the click voxelize to prepare the mesh. That's it! The mesh will now simulate on playback - though you may want to customize its behavior with some of the other tools that ship with this plugin.

### Voxelizer Options

![cubit menu for voxelization / mesh preparation](images/VoxelizerMenu.png)

#### Voxel Grid
1. The voxel size changes the edge length of a voxel. Voxels are always cubes.
1. The sliders can be used to change the subdivision resolution of the voxelization grid.
1. The checkbox "Lock grid size" will attempt to maintain the world size of the grid. So changing either voxel size or the subdivision sliders while this is checked will force the other to change. Because voxels must be cubes, this is a best-effort process.

#### Advanced Options

1. **Surface**: check this box to voxelize and simulate a surface shell of the input mesh.
1. **Solid**: check this box to voxelize and simulate the interior of the mesh. (Checking both surface and solid yields a full, conservative voxelization. This is the default behavior).
1. **Render as voxels**: when unchecked, the original mesh is drawn, but it is simulated according to its voxelization. When checked, the voxels are drawn instead of the original mesh.
1. **Clip triangles**: whether or not to clip the mesh's triangles to voxel bounds during voxelization. Unclipped triangles give a nice effect when tearing a mesh. Clipped tend to look better during regular deformation.

### Mesh-specific simulation settings

Open this menu by opening the Attribute Editor (`Windows > General Editor > Attribute Editor`), and finding the mesh's PBD node.

![PBD simulation settings (per-mesh)](images/pbdsimsettings.png)

1. **Compliance**: this controls the overall squishiness of the mesh. A value of zero is the stiffest it gets!
1. **Voxel relaxation**: this value also has an effect on the squishiness of the mesh, to a lesser extent. As relaxation decreases, the mesh will deform more due to shear.
1. **Voxel edge uniformity**: a companion to voxel relaxation, this controls how strictly voxels have to stay cubes during deformation. As edge uniformity decreases, the mesh deforms more due to voxel anisotropy.
1. **VGS iterations** the number of substeps run in the VGS algorithm core loop. For high resolution voxelizations, more substeps may be required to get convergence. (Careful! This has a high performance impact).
1. **Gravity strength**: the gravitational acceleration constant in m/s^2

These settings are all keyable.

### Assign a material to the mesh interior

The input mesh was just a surface, but the voxelized mesh is a volume! The voxelization process transfers attributes (UVs, normals) and shading sets to the interior, extrapolating based on the closest surface point, but it may not look exactly how you want. By right-clicking a voxelized mesh, you can assign an interior shader:

![assign an interior material](images/assigninteriormaterial.png)

Recommendation: use a material that samples 3D textures to take advantage of the volumetric nature of the voxelized mesh!

This feature is still in development and has limitations. In the future, it will support using shaders with custom vertex attributes regarding the voxel grid (grid position, distance transform information, etc.). See the [roadmap](#issue-roadmap) for more information.

# Painting simulation weights

![moo](images/moo.png)

Beyond the per-mesh simulation settings mentioned [above](#mesh-specific-simulation-settings), there are also dials that can be tuned on a more granular level.

_cubit_ ships with custom tools that allow you to paint on the mass of the mesh and also the strain limits between voxel faces: that is, how much a voxel can stretch or compress before breaking from its neighbors.

<a id="selecting-and-hiding"></a>
## <img src="images/selectandhideicon.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" />Selecting and hiding

Much of the time, the pieces of the mesh you want to paint are on the _inside_. After all, these simulated meshes are solid, and meant to be destroyed. To be able to paint weights on the mesh interior, you need to be able to _access_ it. That's where the select tool comes in handy:

![Selecting and hiding pieces of spot the cow](images/voxelselect.png)

With the voxel selection tool, you can use the typical marquee or drag selection workflows (camera-based or not) to highlight and hide individual voxels - and the pieces of the mesh within.

<a id="particle-mass"></a>
## <img src="icons/VoxelPaint.png" alt="voxel" width="40" align="absmiddle" />Particle mass

In each voxel, there are 8 particles: these are the simulation primitives in PBD. To set the mass of the mesh, you set the mass of particles. The particle paint tool allows you to do just this. 

In the below image, Spot the cow has the particles in his head painted to be a quarter of the mass of the particles in his body. The paint colors have been chosen so that higher transparency means less mass:

![Spot the cow with mass painting](images/particlepainting.png)

If we simulated spot like this, he would be bottom heavy. If we tossed him around, he would rotate about his lower body (his center of mass, rather than his geometric center). And if we collided him with another mesh of lower mass, he wouldn't lose much velocity!

The paint tool also exposes a special _infinite mass_ value: particles with infinite mass are pinned, even under gravity. This can be useful for anchoring a mesh in place while you have other actors deform or destroy it.

For more info about tool settings, see the [paint tool settings section](#paint-tool-settings) below.

<a id="face-to-face-strain-limits"></a>
## <img src="icons/VoxelPaint.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" />Face-to-face strain limits

A similar painting tool exists for setting the face-to-face strain limits between voxels. This tool allows you to set how much the voxels can compress or stretch apart before breaking apart from their neighbors. The units of these strain limits are in voxel-rest-lengths, i.e. if the upper value is 5 (the default), it means voxel-voxel connections can stretch 5x their rest length before breaking.

Like with particle mass, there's also a special _infinite strain_ value that makes face-to-face connections completely unbreakable.

### Paint tool settings

Open this menu by navigating to `Windows > General Editors > Tool Settings` after activating the paint tool from the _cubit_ shelf (or from the mesh's right-click marking menu).

#### Global settings

![Paint tool settings](images/painttoolsettings.png)

- **Radius**: the size of the brush, in pixels.
- **Strength**: the paint value, a p.ercentage of the values set on the PBD node (see mesh-specific settings below).
- **Infinite**: whether to use the special infinite paint value (ignores strength).
- **Mode**: the paint mode; `Set` directly applies the given paint strength to the mesh where painted. `Add` adds the existing paint strength with the brush strength, `Subtract` subtracts it.
- **Camera-based painting**: whether or not to paint only elements visible to the camera. When disables, anything and everything under the brush gets paint applied.
- **Low color**: the color to use as the low end of a gradient, when the paint value is 0.
- **High color**: the color to use as the high end of a gradient, when the paint value is 100.
- **Face mask**: limits face constraint painting to given local-space directions
- **Particle mask**: limits particle painting to a subset of the 8 particles per voxel.

#### Mesh-specific settings

Open this menu by opening the Attribute Editor (`Windows > General Editor > Attribute Editor`), and finding the mesh's PBD node.

![PBD paint settings](images/pbdpaintsettings.png)

On each mesh's PBD node, in Maya's Attribute Editor, there are settings that give meaning to "Paint strength." This is best explained by example: in the above image, `Particle mass (low): 0.01` means that a paint strength of 0 corresponds to a particle mass of 0.01. A paint strength of 100 corresponds to a mass of 5, and anything in between is a linear interpolation of the two.

This way, the global paint settings can stay constant while meaning different things for different meshes, and the paint colors stay meaningful.

<a id="real-time-simulation-interaction"></a>
# <img src="icons/VoxelDrag.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" /> Real-time simulation interaction

With _cubit_, you can interact with the simulated mesh _in the viewport_, during playback. Click-and-drag the mesh with the voxel drag tool to pull, tear, and launch mesh voxels.

![spot right after dragging](images/spotdragged.png)

### Drag tool settings

Open this menu by navigating to `Windows > General Editors > Tool Settings` after activating the drag tool from the _cubit_ shelf (or from the mesh's right-click marking menu).

![Drag tool settings](images/dragtoolsettings.png)

1. **Radius**: the size, in pixels, of the drag tool's influence from the mouse.
1. **Strength**: how far voxels get dragged relative to the mouse's movement. A factor of 1 means voxels get dragged exactly as much as the mouse moves.
1. **Camera-based**: whether or not the mouse can drag voxels that are not visible.

<a id="adding-primitive-colliders"></a>
# <img src="icons/VoxelCollider.png" alt="voxel" width="30" align="absmiddle" /> Adding primitive colliders

![Capsule collider](images/capsulecollider.png)

Other objects in the scene can participate in the simulation via primitive colliders. _cubit_ supports five types of primitive collider shapes: plane, sphere, capsule, box, and cylinder. As their name implies, colliders can act as kinematic collision volumes against simulated meshes. You can even animate colliders via keyframes!

Attach a collider to an object by selecting the object in the viewport, then right-clicking the collider icon in the _cubit_ shelf menu and selecting your desired collider shape.

### Collider settings

![collider editor](images/collidereditor.png)

Each collider has slightly different settings depending on its shape - various adjustable geometric properties. The collider settings can be found in its shape node in the Attribute Editor.

In addition to geometric attributes, each collider has a `Friction` attribute that controls how simulated PBD particles interact with the collider surface.

Fun fact - when you voxelize your first mesh, if you don't already have a collider in the scene, a plane collider will be created for you to act as the ground!

These settings are all keyable.

# Global Simulation Settings

In addition to the per-mesh simulation settings [discussed previously](#mesh-specific-simulation-settings), there are some simulation settings that affect all simulated objects.

![global simulation settings](images/globalsimulationsettings.PNG)
1. **Enable particle collisions**: when enabled, PBD particles can collide with each other. This allows voxels to stack on each other, prevents interpenetration of different parts of a mesh, and allows for multiple meshes to collide with each other.
1. **Enable primitive collisions**: when enabled, PBD particles will collide with primitive colliders. 
1. **Substeps per frame**: this setting controls the number of PBD loop iterations performed per frame. Setting this too low can cause under-convergence (often manifests as extra compliance), and setting it too high can have a large impact on performance.
1. **Particle friction**: this is the friction coefficient for particle-particle collisions.

The reason these settings are global is because particle data must be managed in one place in order to facilitate collisions between particles of different meshes.

These settings are all keyable.

<a id="issue-roadmap"></a>
# 🚧 Roadmap

There are still several features under development (though currently on pause), and many bugs as well. You can view them all in repo's [issues](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues). There are a few high-priority enhancements to call out here, though:

1. [Support for saving scenes with the _cubit_ plugin!](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/45) Pretty important obviously, it just didn't make the beta cut. Similarly - [the ability to reset the simulation](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/36) to the beginning or cached frames.
1. [Support for recording and playing back interactions with the drag tool.](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/77) Right now, interaction is just for fun and testing; it cannot be rendered out. With record and replay, it could be included in the render.
1. [Support for using voxelization vertex attributes in custom interior shaders.](https://github.com/mzschwartz5/cubit/issues/41) Basically, right now you can assign a shader to the interior of the voxelized mesh, but your shader does not have access to some key information about the voxelized mesh that could greatly help create interesting volumetric effects. 

# Developing the plug-in

### Development requirements
- vcpkg: (clone from https://github.com/microsoft/vcpkg.git , go to the directory, and run the bootstrap: .\bootstrap-vcpkg.bat)
- Environment variables: 
  - `MAYA_PLUGIN_DIR` set to a directory where Maya finds plugins. There are several (run `getenv MAYA_PLUG_IN_PATH` in MEL command line or open the plug-in manager). Ideally, choose one that doesn't require admin privelege. 
  - `VCPKG_ROOT` set to the installation directory of `vcpkg`.
 - Dependencies listed in `vcpkg.json` and will be downloaded automatically on initial build.

Debug configuration: builds dependencies as DLLs and puts them alongside the plugin `.mll` in the specified maya plugin directory. Building as DLLs reduces the build time.

Release configuration: builds dependencies as static libs. Slower to build, but easier to distribute / consume. Release builds, of course, will run much faster as well.


# License

This project uses the CGAL (Computational Geometry Algorithms Library).

CGAL is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL).
See https://www.cgal.org/license.html for details.

If you distribute this software, you must comply with the terms of the GPL.
